add doc for workload identity (#3770)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure: docs/book/src/topics/workload-identity.md

that enables Kubernetes applications (e.g. CAPZ ) to access Azure cloud 
resources securely with Azure Active Directory.

This document describes a quick start guide of using workload identity and 
assumes that you have access to Azure cloud.

Workload identity is currently worked upon and cloud provider azure 
integration is in progress. Please refer [this](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/issues/3589) issue for more details.
For more details around it, please refer the [proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/main/docs/proposals/20221611-workload-identity-integration.md)

## Workload Identity Quick Start Guide

- Create a public and private key pair. For example, you can generate the 
  key pairs using OpenSSL.

  Generate a private key called sa.key using the following command:
```bash
$openssl genrsa -out sa.key 2048
```
  Generate a public key using the private key. 
```bash
$openssl rsa -in sa.key -pubout -out sa.pub
```

- Create and upload Discovery and JWKS document using this [link](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/installation/self-managed-clusters/oidc-issuer.html)

> - Create a federated identity credential using the steps outlined [here](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/topics/federated-identity-credential.html)

Reviewer: In this step, which service account should we be using? Should we create a new service account for this step?

Author: Let me clarify this step a bit more. So actually this link of creating Federated identity credential is bit more involved and  I am thinking to write the simplest steps here so that one can get started and also provide the link for more curious users.

- Create a Kind cluster with necessary flags. You can use the following kind 

>   config yaml.

Reviewer: I tried creating a kind cluster using this yaml file but got the following error. Not sure if it's something wrong on my end:
```
ERROR: failed to create cluster: could not determine kind / apiVersion for config: yaml: line 2: mapping values are not allowed in this context
```

Author: Good catch. I think it missed the `Kind: CLuster` line at the beginning. Let me do that. 
Plus, I think adding a command `kind create cluster --config config.yaml` should be nice.

# Workload Identity

Azure AD Workload identity is the next iteration of Azure AD Pod identity 
that enables Kubernetes applications (e.g. CAPZ ) to access Azure cloud 
resources securely with Azure Active Directory.

This document describes a quick start guide of using workload identity and 
assumes that you have access to Azure cloud.

Workload identity is currently worked upon and cloud provider azure 
integration is in progress. Please refer [this](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/issues/3589) issue for more details.
For more details around it, please refer the [proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/main/docs/proposals/20221611-workload-identity-integration.md)

## Workload Identity Quick Start Guide

### Setting Up Management Cluster on Kind

- Create a public and private key pair. For example, you can generate the 
  key pairs using OpenSSL.

>   Generate a private key called sa.key using the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generate a private key called `sa.key` using the following command:
```

```bash

> $openssl genrsa -out sa.key 2048

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ openssl genrsa -out sa.key 2048
```

```

Set the environment variable `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE` to the path of the
generated `sa.key`. This ENV var will be used in the upcoming step. 
Note: You can use `readlink -f sa.key` to get the absolute path of the key file.

Generate a public key using the private key.
```bash

> $openssl rsa -in sa.key -pubout -out sa.pub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ openssl rsa -in sa.key -pubout -out sa.pub
```

```
Set the environment variable `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_KEY_FILE` to the path of the
generated `sa.pub`. This ENV var will be used in the upcoming step.

- Create and upload Discovery and JWKS document using this [link](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/installation/self-managed-clusters/oidc-issuer.html)

- At this stage, you will need to create a federated identity credential.

>   - You can create that either with Azure AD application or user assigned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - You can create that either with Azure AD application or user-assigned
```

    identity.

>   - The next bullet has link that has steps on creating the federated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The next list item links to steps on creating the federated
```

>     identity credential. You will need to setup couple of environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    identity credential. You will need to set up several environment
```

>     variables as mentioned in the sub bullet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    variables:
```

    - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAMESPACE` : Namespace where the capz-manager pod
      will run.
    - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAME` : Name of the capz-manager k8s service account.

>     - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_ISSUER` : This is the path of the azure storage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_ISSUER` : This is the path of the Azure storage
```

      container which you created in the previous step which is:
      `"https://${AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT}.blob.core.windows.net/${AZURE_STORAGE_CONTAINER}/"`

  - Create a federated identity credential using the steps outlined [here](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/topics/federated-identity-credential.html)

- Create a Kind cluster with necessary flags with the following command:

```bash
cat <<EOF | kind create cluster --name azure-workload-identity --config=-
kind: Cluster
apiVersion: kind.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
nodes:
- role: control-plane
  extraMounts:
    - hostPath: ${SERVICE_ACCOUNT_KEY_FILE}
      containerPath: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.pub
    - hostPath: ${SERVICE_ACCOUNT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE}
      containerPath: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.key
  kubeadmConfigPatches:
  - |
    kind: ClusterConfiguration
    apiServer:
      extraArgs:
        service-account-issuer: ${SERVICE_ACCOUNT_ISSUER}
        service-account-key-file: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.pub
        service-account-signing-key-file: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.key
    controllerManager:
      extraArgs:
        service-account-private-key-file: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.key
EOF
```

> - Initialize a management cluster using `clusterctl`. Use the below command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Initialize a management cluster using `clusterctl` using the below command.
```

  If you do not have `clusterctl` installed, then follow this [link](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/user/quick-start.html#install-clusterctl)
  to install.
```bash
$ clusterctl init --infrastructure azure
```

> ### Creating A Workload Cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Creating a Workload Cluster
```

> - As mentioned earlier in the doc, cloud provider integration is worked upon

Reviewer 2: Do we need to remind users that the integration is still being worked on? I think we should just start with "Create a user-assigned identity which..." to keep it simple.

>   and at this stage we need to create an user assigned identity which cloud

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a user-assigned identity which cloud
```

  provider azure can use for authentication. Below are the steps:
  - [Create](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/active-directory/managed-identities-azure-resources/how-manage-user-assigned-managed-identities?pivots=identity-mi-methods-azp#create-a-user-assigned-managed-identity)
a user-assigned managed identity in Azure.
  - [Create a role assignment](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/active-directory/managed-identities-azure-resources/howto-assign-access-portal#use-azure-rbac-to-assign-a-managed-identity-access-to-another-resource)
to give the identity Contributor access to the Azure subscription where the workload cluster will be created.

> - Before we can generate a workload cluster YAML configuration set the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Before generating a workload cluster YAML template, set the
```

  following environment variables.
```bash
export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<your-azure-subscription-id>

> export AZURE_CLIENT_ID=<your-azure-client-id>

Reviewer: It is important to specify that this is the client ID for the AAD app or user-assigned identity that you used to create the federated identity.

export AZURE_TENANT_ID=<your-azure-tenant-id>

> export AZURE_CONTROL_PLANE_MACHINE_TYPE="Standard_B2s"

Reviewer 2: These variable values don't need to be quoted, unless you prefer that as a style thing.

export AZURE_NODE_MACHINE_TYPE="Standard_B2s"
export AZURE_LOCATION="eastus"

# Identity secret. Though these are not used in workload identity, we still
# need to set them for the sake of generating the workload cluster YAML configuration
export AZURE_CLUSTER_IDENTITY_SECRET_NAME="cluster-identity-secret"
export CLUSTER_IDENTITY_NAME="cluster-identity"
export AZURE_CLUSTER_IDENTITY_SECRET_NAMESPACE="default"
```
- Generate a workload cluster template using the following command.

```bash

> $ clusterctl generate cluster azwi-quickstart --kubernetes-version v1.27.3  --worker-machine-count=3 >azwi-quickstart.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ clusterctl generate cluster azwi-quickstart --kubernetes-version v1.27.3  --worker-machine-count=3 > azwi-quickstart.yaml
```

```

> - Edit the generated `azwi-quickstart.yaml` to make following changes for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Edit the generated `azwi-quickstart.yaml` to make the following changes for
```

>   workload identity in `AzureClusterIdentity` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  workload identity to the `AzureClusterIdentity` object.
```

  - Change the type to `WorkloadIdentity`.
  - Remove the `clientSecret` spec.

> The AzureClusterIdentity specification should like the following.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AzureClusterIdentity specification should look like the following.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureClusterIdentity
metadata:
  name: cluster-identity
spec:
  type: WorkloadIdentity
  allowedNamespaces: {}
  tenantID: <your-tenant-id>
  clientID: <your-client-id>
```

> - Change the `AzureMachineTemplate` to include user-assigned-identity by

Reviewer: Would this change need to be made to both the control plane and worker `AzureMachineTemplate`?

Author: Yes

  adding the following in its `spec`.
```yaml
      identity: UserAssigned
      userAssignedIdentities:

>       - providerID: /subscriptions/${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}/resourceGroups/${RESOURCE_GROUP}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/${USER_ASSIGNED_IDENTITY_NAME}

Reviewer: A note should be added mentioning that a user-assigned identity needs to be created regardless of whether you're using it to create the federated identity or not, as well as giving it access to the subscription scope.

Author: Added it to the top

```
A sample `AzureMahineTemplate` after the edit should look like the below:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: ${CLUSTER_NAME}-md-0
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      osDisk:
        diskSizeGB: 128
        osType: Linux
      sshPublicKey: ${AZURE_SSH_PUBLIC_KEY_B64:=""}
      identity: UserAssigned
      userAssignedIdentities:

>       - providerID: /subscriptions/${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}/resourceGroups/${CI_RG:=capz-ci}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/${USER_IDENTITY:=cloud-provider-user-identity}

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
      - providerID: /subscriptions/${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}/resourceGroups/${RESOURCE_GROUP}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/${USER_ASSIGNED_IDENTITY_NAME}
```

For consistency with the example providerID above

      vmSize: ${AZURE_NODE_MACHINE_TYPE}
```

- At this stage, you can apply this yaml to create a workload cluster.

Notes:
- Please follow this [link](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/main/templates/test/ci/cluster-template-prow-workload-identity.yaml)
to see a workload cluster yaml configuration that uses workload identity.

> - The workload cluster creating via workload identity will be more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Creating a workload cluster via workload identity will be
```

  If you do not have `clusterctl` installed, then follow this [link](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/user/quick-start.html#install-clusterctl)
  to install.
```bash
$ clusterctl init --infrastructure azure
```

### Creating A Workload Cluster

- As mentioned earlier in the doc, cloud provider integration is worked upon
  and at this stage we need to create an user assigned identity which cloud
  provider azure can use for authentication. Below are the steps:
  - [Create](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/active-directory/managed-identities-azure-resources/how-manage-user-assigned-managed-identities?pivots=identity-mi-methods-azp#create-a-user-assigned-managed-identity)
a user-assigned managed identity in Azure.
  - [Create a role assignment](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/active-directory/managed-identities-azure-resources/howto-assign-access-portal#use-azure-rbac-to-assign-a-managed-identity-access-to-another-resource)
to give the identity Contributor access to the Azure subscription where the workload cluster will be created.

- Before we can generate a workload cluster YAML configuration set the

>   following environment variables.

Reviewer: I think we may need to set `USER_ASSIGNED_IDENTITY_NAME` here as well since it is referenced in the spec.

Reviewer: Ah I should've pointed to this line: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/pull/3770/files#diff-617e118fb330f6378b8c23d2f2dcb928f31379e840a9b16f2392b59aef139390R143

It is being referenced by the part of the spec we add to the `AzureMachineTemplate` and wasn't specified to be set before in the guide.

Reviewer: Oh wait nevermind. You will need to enter them manually anyways so setting the environment variable does not apply in this case. Sorry for the confusion!

```bash
export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<your-azure-subscription-id>
export AZURE_CLIENT_ID=<your-azure-client-id>
export AZURE_TENANT_ID=<your-azure-tenant-id>
export AZURE_CONTROL_PLANE_MACHINE_TYPE="Standard_B2s"
export AZURE_NODE_MACHINE_TYPE="Standard_B2s"
export AZURE_LOCATION="eastus"

# Identity secret. Though these are not used in workload identity, we still
# need to set them for the sake of generating the workload cluster YAML configuration
export AZURE_CLUSTER_IDENTITY_SECRET_NAME="cluster-identity-secret"
export CLUSTER_IDENTITY_NAME="cluster-identity"
export AZURE_CLUSTER_IDENTITY_SECRET_NAMESPACE="default"
```
- Generate a workload cluster template using the following command.

```bash
$ clusterctl generate cluster azwi-quickstart --kubernetes-version v1.27.3 >
azwi-quickstart.yaml
```

- Edit the generated `azwi-quickstart.yaml` to make following changes for
  workload identity.

>   - Change the type to `WorkloadIdentity`.

Author: Done

spec:
  type: WorkloadIdentity
  allowedNamespaces: {}
  tenantID: <your-tenant-id>
  clientID: <your-client-id>
```

- Change the `AzureMachineTemplate` to include user-assigned-identity by
  adding the following in its `spec`.
```yaml
      userAssignedIdentities:
      - providerID: /subscriptions/${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}/resourceGroups/${RESOURCE_GROUP}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/${USER_ASSIGNED_IDENTITY_NAME}
```
A sample `AzureMahineTemplate` after the edit should look like the below:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureMachineTemplate
metadata:
  name: ${CLUSTER_NAME}-md-0
  namespace: default
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      identity: UserAssigned
      osDisk:
        diskSizeGB: 128
        osType: Linux
      sshPublicKey: ${AZURE_SSH_PUBLIC_KEY_B64:=""}
      userAssignedIdentities:
      - providerID: /subscriptions/${AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID}/resourceGroups/${CI_RG:=capz-ci}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/${USER_IDENTITY:=cloud-provider-user-identity}
      vmSize: ${AZURE_NODE_MACHINE_TYPE}
```
- Do not forget to change the AzureClusterIdentity reference name in 

>   `AzureCluster` object in `identityRef` section. 

Author: You are right. This statement is incorrect and I will remove it. Actually, initially I was planning to have steps such that a new `AzureClusterIdentity` for workload identity is created by the user and then referenced in the `AzureCluster` object. 
Thank you

generated `sa.key`. This ENV var will be used in the upcoming step. 
Note: You can use `readlink -f sa.key` to get the absolute path of the key file.

Generate a public key using the private key.
```bash
$ openssl rsa -in sa.key -pubout -out sa.pub
```
Set the environment variable `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_KEY_FILE` to the path of the
generated `sa.pub`. This ENV var will be used in the upcoming step.

- Create and upload Discovery and JWKS document using this [link](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/installation/self-managed-clusters/oidc-issuer.html)

- At this stage, you will need to create a federated identity credential.
  - You can create that either with Azure AD application or user-assigned
    identity. Please note that user assigned identity will need to be created
    regardless because cloud provider azure integration is not yet done. The
    steps are mentioned in the next section of workload cluster creation.
  - The next list items links to steps on creating the federated
    identity credential. You will need to set up several environment
    variables:
    - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAMESPACE` : Namespace where the capz-manager pod
      will run.

>     - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAME` : Name of the capz-manager k8s service account.

Reviewer 3: I maybe completely thick here by missing something obvious, can you please elaborate for my clarity on what does `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAME` implies? Or how can one find it?

Author: `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_NAME` is the name of the `ServiceAccount` that the capz pod will use. You can find its name in the config of the capz manager here. 
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/main/config/rbac/service_account.yaml#L5
Though the actual name becomes `capz-manager` ( instead of `manager` ) after kustomize render.

    - `SERVICE_ACCOUNT_ISSUER` : This is the path of the Azure storage
      container which you created in the previous step which is:
      `"https://${AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT}.blob.core.windows.net/${AZURE_STORAGE_CONTAINER}/"`

  - Create a federated identity credential using the steps outlined [here](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/topics/federated-identity-credential.html)

>     You can either use `user-assigned-identity` or `AD application` to create federated identity credential.

Reviewer: I saw that you put a note at the bottom to add the contributor role to the user-assigned-identity. I think it's also important to put it here for those who choose to use user assigned identity to create the federated identity

Author: done

      containerPath: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.pub
    - hostPath: ${SERVICE_ACCOUNT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE}
      containerPath: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.key
  kubeadmConfigPatches:
  - |
    kind: ClusterConfiguration
    apiServer:
      extraArgs:
        service-account-issuer: ${SERVICE_ACCOUNT_ISSUER}
        service-account-key-file: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.pub
        service-account-signing-key-file: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.key
    controllerManager:
      extraArgs:
        service-account-private-key-file: /etc/kubernetes/pki/sa.key
EOF
```

- Initialize a management cluster using `clusterctl` using the below command.
  If you do not have `clusterctl` installed, then follow this [link](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/user/quick-start.html#install-clusterctl)
  to install.
```bash
$ clusterctl init --infrastructure azure
```

### Creating a Workload Cluster

- Create a user-assigned identity using the below steps:
  - [Create](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/active-directory/managed-identities-azure-resources/how-manage-user-assigned-managed-identities?pivots=identity-mi-methods-azp#create-a-user-assigned-managed-identity)
a user-assigned managed identity in Azure.

>   - [Create a role assignment](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/role-assignments-portal-managed-identity)

Reviewer 3: Might be worth adding a note to save `USER_ASSIGNED_IDENTITY_NAME` after creating it.

Author: Sure. Will add it

to give the identity Contributor access to the Azure subscription where the workload cluster will be created.

- Before generating a workload cluster YAML configuration set the
  following environment variables.
```bash
export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<your-azure-subscription-id>
# This is the client ID of the AAD app or user-assigned identity that you used to created the federated identity.
export AZURE_CLIENT_ID=<your-azure-client-id>
export AZURE_TENANT_ID=<your-azure-tenant-id>
export AZURE_CONTROL_PLANE_MACHINE_TYPE="Standard_B2s"
export AZURE_NODE_MACHINE_TYPE="Standard_B2s"

> export AZURE_LOCATION="eastus"

Reviewer 3: Do you know if `AZURE_LOCATION` being specified here and the `LOCATION` being specified in [AAD Workload Identity Discovery Identity -> Create an Azure Blob storage account](https://azure.github.io/azure-workload-identity/docs/installation/self-managed-clusters/oidc-issuer/discovery-document.html#1-create-an-azure-blob-storage-account) should be same?

Author: It is not required to be same.

# Identity secret. Though these are not used in workload identity, we still
# need to set them for the sake of generating the workload cluster YAML configuration
export AZURE_CLUSTER_IDENTITY_SECRET_NAME="cluster-identity-secret"
export CLUSTER_IDENTITY_NAME="cluster-identity"
export AZURE_CLUSTER_IDENTITY_SECRET_NAMESPACE="default"
```
- Generate a workload cluster template using the following command.

```bash

> $ clusterctl generate cluster azwi-quickstart --kubernetes-version v1.27.3  --worker-machine-count=3 > azwi-quickstart.yaml

Reviewer 3: Might be worth removing `$` from the _bash_ commands below for easier copy-paste of the commands.
```bash
...
```

Author: Sure. Will do that.

```

- Edit the generated `azwi-quickstart.yaml` to make the following changes for
  workload identity to the `AzureClusterIdentity` object.
  - Change the type to `WorkloadIdentity`.
  - Remove the `clientSecret` spec.

The AzureClusterIdentity specification should look like the following.
```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AzureClusterIdentity
metadata:

>   name: cluster-identity

Reviewer 3: We also see in the `metadata`. Shall we mention to delete it?
```
metadata:
    name: cluster-identity
    namespace: default
```

Author: Did not understand?

Reviewer 3: Apologies for the blunder. Corrected my question.

Author: That should be alright. It works either way and it is quite usual to explicitly specify default namespace.

spec:
  type: WorkloadIdentity

>   allowedNamespaces: {}

Reviewer 4: should this be

```
  allowedNamespaces: 
    list:
    - <cluster-namespace>
```

so we're recommending a more secure, granular approach by default?

Author: Sure, I kept that so that it is easy to follow with copy paste but makes sense to change it. I will add a comment on how to allow for all ns.
